---
title: 'Knuteon! - A capillary electrophoresis data extraction utility for Karat32 data files'
tags:
  - Python
  - chemistry
  - capillary electrophoresis
  - Karat 32 data
authors:
  - name: Sven Kochmann
    orcid: 0000-0001-7423-4609
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Chemistry and Centre for Research on Biomolecular Interactions, York University, Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada
   index: 1
date: 22 August 2019
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Capillary electrophoresis has emerged as a versatile and robust separation 
technique in analytical chemistry [@Harstad2016]. This highly efficient 
technique separates analytes with regards to their different 
charge-size-ratio [@Torano2019]. Today, capillary electrophoresis is a 
standard tool in life science research and used, for instance, for 
binding affinity studies and selection of suitable binders 
from libraries [@Le2019].

Capillary electrophoresis instruments used in research are either self-built 
[@Grundmann2012] or purchased as full integrated system from manufacturers 
such as Beckman-Coulter [@Gladysz2019, @Szilagyi2018, @Wrzesniak2016]. The  
instruments from Beckman-Coulter come bundled with *Karat&nbsp;32* software 
for control and evaluation.

While I found *Karat32* in general comfortable and robust, I noticed 
that the data export function often fails to produce ASCII files due to a
variety of reasons. The most common problem was that the referenced method
file in the data file was either not accessible due to absolute paths that 
differed when transfering to another computer or due to too long paths for 
either the method or data files. These problems are existent among all 
versions I used so far (7−10). Sometimes it was possible to fix this problem, 
but often it was impossible to export the data. However, exporting data 
functionality was required for further analysis, processing, or simply 
plotting of data. 

*Karat32* data files are just OLE archives (Object Linking and Embedding 
files [@OLE2019]) that can be extracted for example by 7-Zip [@Sevenzip2019]. 
Unfortunately, the information and data of the individual signals are spread 
across multiple files in the archive and partially compressed by PKWARE
Data Compression Library Implode method [@ZIPWIKI]. These two issues render it 
cumbersome to manually extract the data.

Therefore, I developed ``Knuteon!`` [@knuteon] (name generated by my name generator
Chem-name-gen [@chemnamegen]). ``Knuteon!`` is a small and handy command-line-based 
application that allows extracting individual data signals from *Karat&nbsp;32* 
data files. The extracted data signals are then saved as simple text files, which
can easily processed by other applications.

``Knuteon!`` is easy to use on any platform that supports Python and also provides
some command line parameters to extract specific traces or header information of a
data file. The program is released under the GNU General Public License 3 (GPLv3) 
and available at its Github repository [@knuteon]. The latest version has been 
archived to Zenodo [@knuteon-doi]. I hope that it is of use for the capillary 
electrophoresis community.


# References
